---
layout: post
title:  "Javascript - DOM"
date:   2018-05-30
categories: JS
---

### Reference: 

Udacity's [JavaScript and the DOM](https://www.udacity.com/course/javascript-and-the-dom--ud117)

### DOM - Document Object Model

* DOM is the full parsed representation of the HTML markup
* HTML specification has a set of rules on how browsers parse and process the html data to paint the web page
* Tree structure that captures the content, structure and properties of the html and all the relationships between the nodes

### DOM Interfaces

* `EventTarget` is an interface implemented by objects that can receive events and may have listeners for them.
* `Node` is an interface from which a number of DOM API object types inherit.
* The `Document` interface represents any web page loaded in the browser and serves as an entry point into the web page's content, which is the DOM tree.
* `Element` is the most general base class from which all objects in a Document inherit. It only has methods and properties common to all kinds of elements. More specific classes inherit from Element.

### Node types 

Name |	Value
---|---
ELEMENT_NODE |	1
ATTRIBUTE_NODE |	2
TEXT_NODE|	3
CDATA_SECTION_NODE| 	4
ENTITY_REFERENCE_NODE |	5
ENTITY_NODE |	6
PROCESSING_INSTRUCTION_NODE|	7
COMMENT_NODE|	8
DOCUMENT_NODE|	9
DOCUMENT_TYPE_NODE|	10
DOCUMENT_FRAGMENT_NODE	|11
NOTATION_NODE 	|12

### Select Page Elements

* Select by ID - document.getElementById()
* Select by Class - document.getElementByClass()
* Select by Tag - document.getElementByTag()
* Select by CSS Selector - document..querySelector()
* Select multiple elements by CSS Selector - document.querySelectorAll()

### Update page content

* element.innseHTML()
* element.textContent()

### Add new element

* document.querySelectorAll()

### DOM rendering timeline

* Notes from the book Javascript - A Definitive Guide

<style>
.container {
    display:grid;
    grid-gap:5px;
    font-family: 'Courier New', Courier, monospace;
    font-size: .85rem;
    padding: 1rem;
}
.container div {
    padding: .2rem .5rem;
}
.container .sync-async {
    grid-column:1/span 1;
    background-color: coral;
    writing-mode: vertical-lr;
    
}
.container .window-event {
    grid-column:2/span 2;
    background-color: aquamarine;
}

.container .phases {
    grid-column:3/span 1;
    background-color: rgb(205, 231, 231);
}

.container .document-state {
    grid-column:2/span 1; 
    background-color: lightcyan;
}
.phases .container div {
    background-color: azure;
}
    </style>

<div class="container">
        <div class="sync-async" style="grid-row:1/span 5">
            Synchronous script execution phase
        </div>
        <div class="document-state" style="grid-row:1/span 3">
            document.readystate = <br>"loading"
        </div>

        <div class="phases">
            <ul>
                <li>Browser creates Document object</li>
                <li>HTML Elements and their text contents on the web page are parsed</li>
                <li>Element objects and Text Nodes are added to the DOM tree</li>
            </ul>
        </div>
        <div class="phases">
            <ul><li>
                When a &lt;script&gt; tag is encountered,
                <div class="container">
                    <div>
                        If not async or not defer or not module, then
                        <ol>
                            <li>The script is downloaded and executed.</li>
                            <li>Parsing of HTML is paused while downloading and executing this script</li>
                            <li>Script can see document content that comes before it.</li>
                        </ol>
                    </div>
                    <div>
                        If `async`, then
                        <ol>
                            <li>Download of the script begins.</li>
                            <li>Any dependent modules also begins to download</li>
                            <li>Parsing of HTML continues and not paused</li>
                            <li>Script can see document content that comes before it.</li>
                            <li>Script may or may not see other document content.</li>
                        </ol>
                    </div>
                </div>
            </li></ul>
        </div>
        <div class="phases">
            <ul>
                <li>Document of the web page is completely parsed at this time.</li>
                <li>Images, videos and async scripts may still be downloading.</li>
                <li>Async scripts may have started or completed execution.</li>
            </ul>
        </div>

        <div class="document-state"  style="grid-row:4/span 2">
            document.readystate = <br>"interactive"
        </div>
        <div class="phases">
            <ul>
                <li>Images, videos and async scripts may still be downloading.</li>
                <li>Async scripts may have started or completed execution.</li>
            </ul>
        </div>

        <div class="phases">
            <ul>
                <li>
                Script tags that are 'defer' or type=module and not `async` are downloaded and executed
                </li>
                <li>
                    This marks the completion of the synchronous script execution phase
                </li>
            </ul>
        </div>

        <div class="window-event">
            "DOMContentLoaded" event fired on the window object<br><br>
            Marks the completion of synchronous script execution phase and begining of asynchronous event-driven phase.
        </div>

        <div class="sync-async" style="grid-row:6/span 4">
            Asynchronous Event driven phase
        </div>

        <div class="document-state">
        </div>
        <div class="phases">
            <ul>
                <li>Images, videos and async scripts completes downloading.</li>
                <li>Async scripts completes execution.</li>
            </ul>
        </div>
        <div class="window-event">
            "load" event fired on the window object
        </div>

        <div class="document-state">
            document.readystate = <br>"complete"
        </div>
        <div class="phases">
            <ul>
                <li>From this point onwards, event handlers are invoked asynchronously in response to
                    <ol>
                        <li>user input events</li>
                        <li>network events</li>
                        <li>timer expirations</li>
                        <li>and so on</li>
                    </ol>
                </li>
            </ul>
        </div>
    </div>







