---
layout: post
title:  "Operating Systems - Part 01: Processes"
date:   2018-05-27
categories: OS
---

Reference: Udacity's [Introduction to Operating System](https://classroom.udacity.com/courses/ud923)

### What does an Operating System do?
1. It is a layer of software between applications and hardware components
2. It hides hardware complexity
3. Enables 2 or more applications to share the common hardware components
4. Isolates and protects applications from one another

### OS Examples

`Desktop OS:`
* Microsoft Windows
* UNIX
    * Mac OS X (BSD - Berkeley System Distribution)
    * Linux
        * Ubuntu
        * Centos
        * Debian

`Embedded OS:`
* Android
* iOS
* Symbian

### Process

* Process is a running instance of an application. 
* An OS can be running multiple instances of the same application. Each instance is a process.
* A process is represented by its `Address space` and `Execution Context` (PCB)


### Virtual Address Space

* `Stack`
* `Heap`
* `Data`
* `Code`
     
* Code and Data are static
* Heap dynamically created during execution
* LIFO - grows and shrinks
* Virtual addresses are resolved into physical addresses from the page table
* Some parts of the virtual address space may not yet be allocated by the OS

### PCB - Process Control Block
* Data structure that OS maintains for every running process to store the state of the processes
* Created when process is created
* The OS copies the state of the process in and out of the CPU registers, before and after the process runs on the CPU.

### Context Switching
* Switching the execution of the CPU from the context of one process to another

### Process states

* New
    * Ready
    * Running 
    * Waiting
* terminated

### CPU Scheduler

* Determines which process from the Ready Queue to run next on the CPU
* How long to run a process
* Scheduling process must be efficient and should not consume CPU for themselves
* Shorter the processes timeslice, more frequently the scheduler is invoked


* `Preempt:` Interrupt and save the current process
* `Schedule:` Run scheduler to save the next process
* `Dispatch:` Dispatch context and switch into its context
* `timeslice:` Time allocated to a process on the CPU

### When will a process be placed on the Ready Queue?

* When the process I/O request is fulfilled
* When the process timeslice expires
* When a new process is created
* When a process id interrupted

### Inter-process communication

* 2 processes may need to share periodic data between each other or pass streams of data or share a common piece of memory
* `Message passing IPC:` OS provides a shared buffer/channel to read/write data
* `Shared Memory IPC:` OS establishes a shared channel and maps it into each process address space. 
The processes can now share data with involving the OS. This method performs better, however the setup cost is higher. 








   

